

===== PAGE 1 =====
NANCY G. LEVESON
       JOHN P. THOMAS

       MARCH 2018



  This handbook is intended for those interested in using STPA on real systems. It is not meant
  to introduce the theoretical foundation, which is described elsewhere. Here our goal is to
  provide direction for those starting out with STPA on a real project or to supplement other
  materials in a class teaching STPA.














COPYRIGHT © 2018 BY NANCY LEVESON AND JOHN THOMAS.  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. THE UNALTERED VERSION OF
THIS HANDBOOK AND ITS CONTENTS MAY BE USED FOR NON-PROFIT CLASSES AND OTHER NON-COMMERCIAL
PURPOSES BUT MAY NOT BE SOLD.
                                                     1

===== PAGE 2 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preface                                                                                                  3
1.   Introduction                                                                                        4
2.   How to do Basic STPA                                                                                14
3.   Integrating STPA into Your System Engineering Process                                             54
4.   Workplace Safety                                                                                  72
5.   Organizational and Social Analysis                                                                86
6.   Identifying Leading Indicators of Risk                                                           101
7.   Designing an Effective Safety Management System                                                  116
8.   Integrating STPA into a Large Organization                                                       142
Appendix A:  Examples of hazards                                                                      146
Appendix B:  Examples of control structures                                                           148
Appendix C:  Examples of UCA tables                                                                   156
Appendix D:  Guidelines for designing and evaluating a safety                                         163
                        management system
Appendix E:  More about why decomposition does not work for                                           167
                        complex, computer-based systems
Appendix F:  Basic engineering and system engineering concepts for                                    169
                       non- engineers
Appendix G:  A new model to assist in causal scenario generation                                      178


Acknowledgements:  Many people provided comments on early drafts of this handbook. We want to
thank them for their help, including (alphabetically) Matthew Boesch (Ford), Diogo Silva Castilho (MIT
and Brazilian Air Force), Christopher Degni (Akamai), Mikela Chatzimichailidou (Imperial College),
Rashmi Hegde (Ford), Stephen Johnson (Fluor), Ioana Koglbauer (University of Graz), Galvani Lacerda
(Embraer), Simon Lucchini (Fluor), Shem Malquist (FedEx), Maj. Dan Montes (U.S. Air Force), Sandro
Nuesch (Ford), Felipe Oliveira (Embraer), Todd Pawlicki (U.C. San Diego Medical Center), Kep Peterson
(Akamai), Martin Rezjek (Zurich University of 

===== PAGE 3 =====
Preface

    This handbook is intended to assist those who want to start using STPA or who want to try using it for
more than simple hazard analysis.  As such, we tried to provide examples and have included more
examples in the appendices. An appendix is also provided to explain some basic engineering concepts
needed to understand and use the handbook to those who are not trained in engineering. Other new
concepts are introduced in the main chapters of the handbook itself.
    The introduction provides a brief introduction to STAMP, the accident causality model underlying
STPA. It also shows examples accidents and explains why STPA is needed for today’s complex, software-
intensive systems.
    The next chapter is an in-depth tutorial on how to perform STPA. It will be useful for the beginner as
well as for those who have tried STPA and want to improve their results.
    The rest of the handbook describes uses for STPA, including how to integrate it into a standard
system engineering process, its use in workplace safety, using STPA for organizational analysis and
emergent system properties other than safety, using STPA to provide leading indicators of increasing
risk, designing an effective safety management system, and cyber security.
    The final chapter describes what we have learned about integrating STPA into a large organization
and how to structure the STPA process to make it most effective but also least disruptive to the
enterprise.
    Our goal in writing this handbook is to provide a guide for those who are actually using STPA rather
than writing an academic primer. Therefore, we have omitted references to other work, etc. There are
many other sources that provide this type of information but few that focus on instruction and ways to
use STPA. To find many examples, published papers, theses, etc., see http://psas.scripts.mit.edu/home/
    We encourage users of the handbook to work on examples relevant to their industry as they go
through the handbook.



















                                                                  3

===== PAGE 10 =====
A more complex example in aircraft avionics systems can be found in Appendix A. In addition, Dr.
Ioana Koglbauer at the University of Graz (Austria) provided an example that emphasizes the usefulness
of a systems approach. A certified fixed-base flight simulator at their university has the same production
cockpit components (e.g. rudder-pedals) as the certified aircraft, but the pedals in the simulator often
break and must be replaced. If you try to understand why and solve the problem at the component
level, you could blame and punish the pilot who produced the damage, train the pilot on how to handle
the simulator, or invest in improving the pedals. If you look at interactions among components (people,
hardware, software), and try to understand why the pilots use the pedals differently in the simulator
than in a real aircraft , you come to a different problem definition and solution. It turns out that when
the pilots brake in the simulator, the simulator software is not programmed to show the typical small
pitch down movement when the aircraft comes to a stop. This movement can also be felt when parking
a car. In the absence of this feedback in the aircraft simulator, the pilots apply the brakes longer and
stronger than needed.  For this reason, the pedals break in the simulator, but not in the real aircraft. The
best solution is to improve the software and give pilots the feedback they need.
    In all of these cases (and in hundreds of others), the problems did not stem from individual
component failures but from flaws in the system engineering process that resulted in flawed system
designs. Decompositional analysis cannot identify these causes of accidents including human error,
software requirements errors, and system design flaws. We need something different. That different
theoretical foundation, which underlies STPA, is called System Theory.

System Theory
    As stated above, system theory as used in engineering was created after World War II to deal with
the increased complexity of the systems being built after the war.3 It was also created for biology in
order to successfully understand the complexity of biological systems. In these systems, separation and
analysis of separate, interacting components (subsystems) distorts the results for the system as a whole
because the component behaviors are coupled in non-obvious ways.  The first engineering uses of these
new ideas were in the missile and early warning systems of the 1950s and 1960s.
    So

===== PAGE 20 =====
What should I look for when reviewing hazards?

                  Tips to prevent common mistakes when identifying hazards
                -    Hazards should not refer to individual components of the system
                -    All hazards should refer to the overall system and system state
                -    Hazards should refer to factors that can be controlled or managed by the
                     system designers and operators
                -    All hazards should describe system-level conditions to be prevented
                -    The number of hazards should be relatively small, usually no more than 7
                     to 10
                -    Hazards should not include ambiguous or recursive words like “unsafe”,
                     “unintended”, “accidental”, etc.

    Note that STPA is an iterative method and the hazards need not be set in stone at this point. Later
STPA steps may uncover new hazards and this list can be revisited and revised as needed.

Defining system-level constraints
          Definition: A system-level constraint specifies system conditions or behaviors that need to be
          satisfied to prevent hazards (and ultimately prevent losses)
    Once the system-level hazards are identified, it is straightforward to identify system-level constraints
that must be enforced: simply invert the condition.
          <Hazard>            = <System> & <Unsafe Condition> & <Link to Losses>
          <Safety Constraint> = <System> & <Condition to Enforce> & <Link to Hazards>
          H-1:  Aircraft   violate minimum separation standards [L-1, L-2, L-4, L-5]
          SC-1: Aircraft   must satisfy minimum separation standards from other aircraft and objects [H-1]
          H-2:  Aircraft   airframe integrity is lost [L-1, L-2, L-4, L-5]
          SC-2: Aircraft   airframe integrity must be maintained under worst-case conditions [H-2]
    Each constraint can be traceable to one or more hazards, and each hazard is traceable to one or
more losses. In general, the traceability need not be one-to-one; a single constraint might be used to
prevent more than one hazard, multiple constraints may be related to a single hazard, and each hazard
could lead to one or more losses.
    Constraints can also define how the system must minimize losses in case the hazards do occur. For
example, if aircraft do violate minimum separation then the violation must be detected and measures
must be taken to keep the aircraft from colliding. If a chemical 